Okay.
Pilot, shoot, pilot for the presentation.
Um, thank you very much, um, Dave
and your team for coming before us.
We're pretty excited actually.
This has obviously been a piece of work that's been, uh,
been going for quite some time from, uh, what we've read.
And we're really keen to, uh, get an understanding of
where you've got to and, and what we've got here
to be presented to us today.
So I'll, I'll let you open up with some instructory
Comments. Thank you. Uh,
thank you, Mr. Chair.
And, um, greetings again to the committee members.
You spend a lot of time here. Yeah, but that's a good thing.
Um, look, um, I'm joined here
by my executive leadership team,
but also, um, some of the subject matter experts to talk
through the Kopa that we are about to discuss today,
starting with, and then of course,
the settlements, uh, commitments.
But before we start, I, I just wanna frame the role that
Ty plays in terms of policy advice,
and in particular, the anchor points
and the foundation upon which we carry out our role
as the lead policy advisor on Maori development
and the relationships between Iwi,
Maori and the Crown.
And it's important that we reflect on those anchor points.
'cause I do know that, um, you have asked a number of times
because the previous strategic intentions document finished,
um, in June,
and you asked a number of times,
where are we going to from here?
Um, I do have that document.
It was tabled in, um, on the 1st of July,
our strategic contentions document.
But I just wanna highlight the anchor points.
The first is our act, the Maori Development Act.
And under section five of that act,
and I won't go through the all of the wording,
but it's important to note, there are two areas there.
One is monitoring,
monitoring other government departments and agencies.
And the second is around
promoting increases in the levels of achievement of Maori.
So there's those two things.
In fact, they go in the opposite order, increasing levels
of achievement and monitoring.
So that's our first act, um, anchor point.
And it's a statutory, the, it's a statutory anchor,
anchor point in legislation.
The second are the cabinet papers that the minister took
through cabinet last August.
And as part of that, he sought to clarify the role of
ti and also transfer functions from
to ti.
And so that there would be one strong voice within the
public service to advise on those issues with regards
to Maori development
and, um, iwi Maori relationships with the crowd.
Now, that has led to
five key functions that we have.
The first is to promote increases in levels
of Maori achievement in education, training, employment,
health and economic resource development.
That's under the act,
and it's also reinforced by the cabinet paper.
The second is to monitor
and liaise with departments
to ensure the services they provide to
or for Maori are adequate.
That's under the act and under the two cabinet papers.
The third is to advise the government
and the public service on the distinct rights, interests
and responsibilities of Hapu Iwi and Maori.
That's under the cabinet paper.
And the fourth is to lead post settlement relationships with
PSGs and monitor the crown's implementation
of treaty settlement commitments.
That's under the cabinet papers.
And the fifth is the support investment into wau centered,
locally led government enabled initiatives.
And we've briefed you on the flagship example of
that, which is Wau Water.
Yep. And the final anchor point, um,
is our strategic contentions document.
And if I could just pass those around.
And in particular, um, just draw your attention
to page five of that.
And it's our strategy on a, on a page.
Page. Which page? Page five. Yeah.
In, in,
oh, page, page 10.
Page 10. Strategy on the page.
That's a lovely photo of I'll purpose this wise.
Yeah, look at me.
So, um, page five.
Now that, that highlights our vision,
our purpose, our role.
It's a little different from our previous strategy in
that it identifies our two approaches.
One is to that we are about to speak to you today, that,
and the second is our wau centered locally
led government enabled.
One is our policy approach,
the other is our delivery approach.
And then we have our five strategic priority
areas underneath that.
And you can see what those are.
And of course, it has our values underneath the, the purpose
of the strategy is so that our staff see line of sight
between what they do and what our vision is.
Thriving wau, what our purpose is
to build an New Zealand.
But Wau can all stand, thrive and belong.
And we do that by drawing strength from our past,
because we've been around for a long, long time,
initially in 1840, the first iteration of
the protector department.
Then there is the role, which has changed
because of those cabinet papers in August,
which includes Maori development as it was always, um,
our role, but now also the, the relationship
between Iwi, Maori and the Crown.
And then we have our two strategic, um, approaches,
policy and delivery, and then our five strategic priorities.
And underneath that are our values.
So, so that, that is the strategy,
and those are the three anchor points,
the statutory functions, the cabinet paper papers,
and then this, the strategic contentions document.
So that brings us to why we are here this morning.
To total means to listen, consider, and analyze deliberately
before speaking, writing, and advising.
And essentially what that means is being thoughtful
and considered before you take action.
And as a, uh, policy ministry,
we take this seriously to think very carefully about
how we think about the treaty relationship
between Iwi Maori and the crowd,
and how we go through problem solving and policy issues.
So that's just my introduction.
Um, I have Paula, my deputy secretary,
and Bernard here as one of the general managers to talk
to more of the detail around this.
So I just wonder if we, um, quickly go into
a presentation that, that Paula and Bernard will carry out.
We'll keep this short. It's about 15 minutes,
including Mike Oral Max.
And questions?
No, uh, please ask questions throughout the
presentation. Is that all right, Mr.
Chair? Yeah. Thanks, Doug. Yep. So
You're happy to have questions during the
presentation, or you mean afterwards?
Okay. We've just got, um, four, four slides. Um, oh, cool.
So, um,
um, I wanted to, uh, go to the next slide.
Um, and following on from, uh, Dave's, it's important
to locate this discussion within the context
of our strategic contentions for two reasons.
Really. Policy is a critical lever, uh,
for government in order to be able to deliver, uh,
better outcomes for and with Whanau, iwi and Maori.
And secondly, as Dave has touched on, we think
by naming our policy approach
with being overt in both our policy standards,
what we expect, but also how we conduct ourselves.
And it touches on the part that Dave talked about
with respect to considering being thoughtful about how we
listen, how we analyze before we take action.
So together with our delivery approach, these two, um,
elements coming together can we think, can help us
to undertake our role as the government's lead policy
advisor on Maori development and Iwi
and Maori, um, related with, um, we know
that there are many tools
that policy advisors across government use,
and we want to acknowledge these, um, the,
they're important guidance, um, both
to help support capability within the public service,
but also to be able to apply across, um,
our policy advice.
However, with te we think
that there's a distinguishing element, um,
that we are calling out, which is that, uh, TE
is explicitly grounded in the relationship
that's been established between Hawi
and the Crown, uh, through the te, uh, through TE the of wa.
So our goal is to, as a key public policy framework,
and in doing so, we think that the public service
and decision makers will have a single point of reference
to deliver more effective public services
and improved outcomes for whanau, iwi and Maori.
This presentation is quite a milestone.
Um, as we begin to take our next steps forward, um,
like is always good practice, it's important to look back.
Uh hmm.
And as such, I do want to acknowledge the previous work
that's been undertaken without which we would not be here
today to talk to you about this.
Uh, this. And I particularly want to, uh,
acknowledge in April, 1997, uh, along
with the, at the time Honorable Justice eth.
And at the time, Joe Williams presented a treaty framework
seminar to the New Zealand Law Society,
which framed the Treaty of Wang as a policy, uh, framework.
And this is, I think, an important, um, piece of information
that can, that has helped us.
Uh, secondly, in 1999, this concept was refined further
and became Tuko Treaty framework for which
to support the policy development
to identify treaty implications in, in our work.
At that time, in 2001,
uh, which is still in publication
and circulation today, uh, a guide to the Treaty
of Ang is expressed by the courts in the Ang Tribunal,
was another key, um, information document that
provided that, that we've based this work on.
Um, circa 2004 to 2010, you may all be familiar
with the Maori potential approach
that shifted the framework, um,
towards the realization of Maori potential.
And I think of, um, uh, honorable at this time,
who was quite, um, an avid fan
for realizing Maori potential at the time.
I did try and look for a cup this morning
to see if we had some collateral
around it, but couldn't find it.
Um, between 2011
and 2016, agency started to develop their own, um,
expressions of this work.
And I would like to acknowledge the Ministry
of Education developed Pu Moana,
which was about, um, excellent relationships
between the Ministry of Education
and Iwi at the time, again, calling out
how they intend to work.
Um, and then, um, uh,
treasuries Wai order is another important tool, uh,
that looks to help drive wellbeing from a Maori perspective.
So those are important pieces of information
that have helped us to come to where we are today.
Um, so fast forward to 2020,
and through a self-initiated performance improvement review,
the need to develop a new Maori macro policy framework was
highlighted, and this was expected
to help the organization focus our efforts in
terms of our performance.
And it was, at this time, not long
after that, that formally adopted uni, uh, te
or, um, we entered in,
and that was as our, as our way of doing things.
And we entered into a memorandum of understanding with,
to develop a guidance document on this led
to the delivery of a series of workshops, uh,
with which included workshops with public sector leaders,
uh, testing and trialing the guidance with, uh,
we've had reviews from the treaty, uh,
treaty provisions overview group from DMC's Policy Project,
the Leadership Development Center at, and so,
and we've made further refinements as we've gone along.
So we're actually quite proud to bring this
and be able to present this to you today.
And it seems kind of, it seems appropriate, um,
that this is kind of the, the,
that this is an important milestone, as I've said, um,
to be able to present this to you today.
Um, it's a rii based framework.
Uh, it helps us explore and consider the collective
and individual rights, interests,
and responsibilities of au Hapu Iwi Maori.
And it provides public servants with a consistent approach
to the application of across a
range and engagement.
And I'm gonna hand it to burn
to take us into a deep dive into the,
Uh, in our memo, the committee name, uh,
in introducing the framework
and key concept con concepts of, uh, as Dave has referred
to previously, um, uh, means
to listen, consider, and analyze deliberately
before speaking, writing, and advising.
In practical terms, analysis begins with defining,
clarifying and testing the issue or opportunity at hand.
Essentially, what is the, it this aligns with the first step
of the policy lifecycle, defining the problem
or creating the opportunity.
From this, there are two cut through questions
that we need to ask.
What is the specific,
clearly defined, commonly agreed question?
What is the IT you are trying to solve?
And who is the IT for?
The key concepts of are discussed on pages seven
and eight of the guidance documents you have
before you to summarize, DE
has four representative communities
identified in the corners of the framework, they being ua,
PU citizens,
and the crown, the four axes of de, uh,
on the perimeter, uh, of the diagram, uh,
the partnership axi,
which reflects the relationship established
through the signing of teti, the treaty
where parties act reasonably honorably and in good faith.
The kawana aspect
or access, whose function is to acknowledge the role
of the government to run the country
and make day-to-day decisions.
Access, which recognizes that there are matters that only,
that's only in the domain of Iwi
and Hapu, acknowledging their preexisting rights prior
to the signing of te the treaty.
And finally, the ANA access, which recognizes Maori as
Tua while establishing the concept of citizenship,
thereby recognizing Maori as citizens.
In totality, the four axis, uh, recognize the individual
and connective rights, interests
and responsibilities of whanau, hapu, iwi, and Maori.
The four elements provide guidance, uh,
for working across each of the associated axis, uh,
with tko describing the desired outcome for the framework.
So what is the usability o of across the public service?
Teo is designed to ensure public policy decisions
deliberately consider the individual
and collective rights of iwi and Maori.
For the users of Teo,
the perspective is clear for public servants.
Uh, it will support policy decision makers
to consistently give effect to tei the treaty,
enabling policy makers
and decision makers to understand
who is impacted and to what extent.
Thereby delivering more efficient public services
and improved outcomes for ministers.
Uh, as the application of extends across the public service,
s ministers would expect
to receive advice based on the framework
that is more consistent in its quality
and support, supportive of better decision making.
For members of Parliament,
Ong could support a better understanding
of the perspectives of constituents.
Mm-hmm. Especially engaging
with them in their multiple roles as citizens,
community representatives, or hapu or Iwi members.
And finally, for use yourselves
as select committee members from across parliament,
you play a key role in the deme democratic
process through your work.
In considering bills, scrutinizing government finances
and activity, and engaging in with the public,
the framework provides a consistent point of reference
that will help in your inquiries
and in understanding the rights, interests
and responsibilities of citizens of New Zealand.
Some of the anticipated impacts
and outcomes of applying the framework would be that
by embedding the framework,
agencies will be better positioned
to consider Maori perspectives to key issues.
This will contribute towards increased public sector
confidence in applying te TEI
or treaty analysis in developing robust policy advice,
improving engagement of government agencies with Iwi
and Hapu, Tua and Maori,
and increased quality of policy advice
to ministers across the agencies were implementing
into their strategy, policy, and engagement process.
So what's next for, there are three carriers, um,
of focus in the implementation of this framework.
Firstly, for tools
and guidance, has been working on ways
to apply this framework in all of our own advice.
This has included updating our official correspondence
templates and incorporating into our second opinion advice.
Essentially, we see our role
to role model this framework, uh, to build this.
Officials are developing learning modules,
case study exemplars, quality assurance,
and monitoring frameworks to help build
capacity across the public sector.
Officials are delivering workshops on te,
which will cover the foundations
and application in practice from an engagement
and implementation perspective.
We are piloting, uh, implementation for the remainder
of 2025 to embed TE as a key strategy,
policy and engagement framework across the following
agencies, the Ministry of Justice, department
of Corrections, ministry of Culture
and Heritage, department of Conservation,
and the Ministry of Education
with broader public service implementation
to AC implementation to occur from 2026, it is important
to emphasize that this is an active learning module
of implementation.
We are embarking on starting with a focus on those willing
to participate and inserting feedback loops, uh,
as people's practice, uh, practice its application.
Finally, in terms of mentoring, uh,
and monitoring, TE's Strengthened mentoring
and mon monitoring role provides us with the opportunity
to work with agencies in two ways.
When agencies adopt te, uh, TE will provide mentorship
to support the appropriate adoption
and application of the framework.
And from a monitoring perspective, in the application of
across an agency's mahi, we would expect
to see policy advice that is fit for purpose, delivering
to the distinct needs of those for whom it is designed.
Uh, and we hand it back to the committee
for any questions at this time.
Thank you, maam. Kiara, um, Mr.
We'll open up for any questions
of anybody at this stage. Greg, do you wanna
Start? Yeah. So,
um, thank you so much for the, the amount of work
that has gone for this, uh,
and I appreciate, appreciate the, um,
the gestation period of this.
Um, could you, I, um, read the document carefully.
You stand and listen carefully today,
and I, I'm still, I'm still struggling
to land it practically, so I love the, um,
the vibe, your Honor.
Um, uh, could you give us a couple of examples perhaps of
how you, now that it's been implemented
and landed, how you could see,
just talk us through the process.
So, Bernard, you mentioned, um,
it's gonna roll out the Department
of Corrections Mystery of Justice.
Could you perhaps take a couple of pieces of work
that you know, are, are underway or coming up,
and then talk us through how that work, how that process
is gonna be different because of the application of this?
Can I Yeah. Jump in there with an example of
what is the problem?
Yes, please. Yeah, yeah.
Um, in here,
and Bernard talked about roles and representation
and on the access Yeah.
UA and Maori citizens. Yes.
Well, part of the problem that public servants
are confronted with when they're engaging with Maori
is who are they engaging with?
And for what purpose?
Are you engaging with a citizen
or are you engaging with tanga?
Yeah. And as a representative
or as a, uh, constituency of an iwi or hapu.
And unless you're clear about that, it can lead to,
are you engaging with Maori as a treaty partner?
Yeah. Or are you engaging with Maori
as citizens of New Zealand?
Now I know from my own experience arriving, um,
back in New Zealand in 2019,
what struck me was there were a number of advisory groups,
what I would call advisory groups with various names
that were in government departments, that
the government departments assumed incorrectly.
They were the treaty partner. And they,
So say that last part again,
Assumed incorrectly that they were the treaty partner.
Oh. So the government departments are dealing
with this group think, assuming, mis assuming that,
that they're the treaty partner. Okay. That's
Right. Yeah. And those
groups also believing
that assumption, right?
They were appointed by the crown.
The treaty partner is not appointed by the crown. Sure.
This framework makes it clear who are you dealing
with and for what purpose.
You're dealing with individual Maori citizens
who are providing you with advice in that example.
Right. And it could be a, you know,
and that advice would come through multiple experiences
of being Maori on that access.
But Right. Then they are advisors, they're advising you,
you are the crown, you are representatives
of representatives of the crown seeking advice.
Ah, however, if you are wanting to speak
to the treaty partner, then look at the partnership access,
be clear about who you're speaking to and for what purpose.
Ah, gosh.
That is, that's fascinating
because that has implications across
so many parts of the government.
But if we confuse this,
not only do we undermine the partnership
because it's the wrong people.
Yeah. Not every Maori is speaking
as the treaty partner all the time.
I'm an example of that right now.
I, so, so, so that is, is part
of the problem of, of being clear about who you are speaking
to and what situation and for what purpose.
Um, wow. It's a completely different, yeah. Yes it is.
And um, and I'm not quite sure how we got to that point.
Yeah. Uh, but,
but that, that actually happened in a,
uh, a number of times.
So thinking about this as a tool for the public service,
um, to build on Dave's point,
public servants are not the treaty partner,
and they're not an expression of the treaty partner.
Uh, so what this tool asks public servants to do,
and the development of policy, uh, advice Mm.
Um, to government is, uh, consider, uh,
well listen to and consider
and analyze what a particular problem is that they're trying
to solve, or what is the opportunity that they're trying
to, uh, enable.
And by starting in, in that position,
what it asks the public service to do is locate,
uh, we're clear.
We, we, we, we work, we're part of the katanga,
we are on the KA a access.
Yeah. We, we don't represent Tonga. Yeah. Um, and so forth.
So we start in the KAA space.
Then you need to locate, well,
what is the problem you are trying to resolve?
Um, or the opportunity you are trying to create.
And, um,
and then take you through a process which looks to be, start
to be very clear about, uh, about that
defining the problem.
And as Burna said,
and for who, um, if you take an example, uh, for instance
around, um, housing after the weather, housing crisis,
after the, the extreme weather events a couple of years ago,
um, if you just take that as a broad, um, uh,
a broad statement, you then need to understand, well,
which housing crisis are you talking about in relation
to everything that happened, um, along the East Coast
and up in Tamaki?
Um, is it land that is, is it in relation to UA
or land, uh, that is UA Maori, uh, is it in relation to land
that is held by general, you know, freehold land?
Um, is it the housing crisis related to people's homes
that were affected by the site phone?
And once you start,
'cause it can come from, it can be all of that.
And so as part of a policy process, what you're asking, um,
the pe people who are working on that to do is identify
what is the issue you are trying to solve
and who are the people that are affected by that?
Because by doing that, it could lead you to both
who you need to engage with and the different roles
and representations that they, uh,
the different hats that they wear.
Mm. And it will also lead you potentially to, well,
what are the policy options?
Because it won't be one size fits all.
'cause everybody will have different circumstances.
Often all of that is conflated. It's not made clear.
Um, and that's what we are trying to enable through to.
Mm. It doesn't just to, just to flesh out the,
the complexity of the problem.
'cause it's not simple. We've talked,
talked a bit about policy here,
but it also impacts upon delivery.
Mm-hmm. And,
and again, um, a broad example during,
um, one of the various crises we had over the last,
uh, five years, I was approached
and asked to deliver food supply
to a community for various reasons.
They, they were cut off. And the, the,
the question I asked the person who was requesting it,
I said, why are you asking me?
And the answer given to me,
and this was within the public service, was they are Maori.
My, my answer to that is they are citizens.
They are citizens
and citizens
who do citizens get food supply from in this crisis.
Now, I'm happy to lean in here,
but they should expect what other
citizens expect from the agency responsible
for delivering that service.
And then that leads to our monitoring function.
So, so in that case, sorry,
I wasn't clear in that case. I think we're
Trying to soak this in. Don't
take the silences out.
So if, if you take, take that, um,
they were only seen as one thing.
Yes. Um, as, as Maori and,
and all of the magnificence that is being Maori,
but ignoring the fact they are New Zealand citizens,
and this is significant.
It wasn't deliberate. It was confused.
Yeah. And it's common. It's a common confusion.
Adrian killed everyone.
Um, KDA, Dave, thanks for, for this,
um, presentation.
And thanks for the work
that your whole team have done on it.
Um, like a lot of us have, have been around the, um,
this cope up for a long time.
And, um, and it's complex, it's difficult to get ones head
around, but I just wanted to say that I thought
that this was really well written.
And, um, I think a lot of people who've been
around it will understand it very clearly.
I think Bernard used get called it a active,
active learning model.
Is that Yes. Yeah. Yeah.
And I, and I think, uh, for me, that's kind of like the key,
um, moving forward.
And from my perspective on this committee, it's not
what we say today or here today.
It's next year and the year after
and what you report back to us.
'cause I would expect that we'll see, um,
in your annual, uh, reports, um, you know, updates on
how many, uh, government agencies have taken this up,
what sort of, um, progress, uh, that we're making.
Um, I wouldn't expect that just
because we've, um, released, um, this Copa
now that the switch will go on
and everything will now be operating.
Um, and like it's a perfect world.
Well, we all know that's not going to happen
because, um, there are a whole lot of other things
that government agencies are juggling.
Um, and this will be just one if they, uh,
agree to take it up.
So, um, just want to say to all of you,
um, because I think, um, it, you know, from my perspective,
um, this is, um, a significant
milestone in that relationship.
One well overdue.
And I, I, I do remember the honorable
actually talking about this.
Um, and as I was reading it, I thought, oh,
okay, that's what she meant.
Um, so yeah, so I,
I don't re I don't actually have any questions for my, my,
um, is, is just encouragement.
Just get on with it.
And, um, I I, yeah, I'm,
I'm forever an optimist And I hope this works.
There's nothing else has.
Yeah. Thank you Adrian, for those, uh,
those thought thoughtful comments.
And if I could sort of try
and get a question that's related to that, there is, uh, I,
I suppose the crude way of looking at this is you've,
you've created a tool, you've created the widget,
now you've gotta go and sell it.
So what do you see as the challenges, uh, that,
that are moving forward, uh, in, in getting this
to be used widely?
And, uh, how would you, uh,
look at managing those challenges, taking it forward?
Mm-hmm. Forward.
Actually, my question is a bit like that.
So I'll just throw it in while we are,
because I note in the, um,
and thank you for the presentation
and thank you for the incredible
amount of work you've done on this.
My question relates to that was that I note it says here
to understand and reply to, to, uh, to essential
to have a clear understanding of, um,
including the understanding on the
articles and the principles.
And so that is related to that as one
of the challenges in the problem service,
because there's two parts, aren't there?
There's that part, and then there's
this part that relates to it.
So I guess I'm interested in that part too. Mm.
I, I just start by saying, um, part of this,
and Adrian has, I think, reflected on some
of this is undoing learned behavior, right?
So unlearning. Yeah, unlearning. Yeah.
Um, and you have to do that carefully
because this isn't a framework where you can take a problem
and just go bang, and it will be, an answer will pop out.
You actually have to consider,
because depending on the situation,
you might get a different answer.
Who are you talking to in what role?
So I think the first part of this would be,
um, some unlearning.
You have to be quite careful and,
and considered in approaching this
because discussions around the treaty
can be quite divisive.
And so we've got to be really
considered on, on how we do this.
And I, and I, and I say that
because if you think about that gestation, um,
that Paula talked about now that went over many years, um,
I, um, initiated the p the performance improvement
framework in 2020.
It identified we needed a policy framework,
but at the time we were not responsible for
what was then called the crown Maori relationship.
So this could not be moved any further than, um, so
you've just gotta get the right, um, circumstances
to be able to take this out.
Mm-hmm. And this will be years in embed embedding. Mm.
So that would, we'd need to do some unlearning.
But in terms of the, the work program that we've got ahead
of us all in the team have, have a plan.
We have a plan. I mean, um, uh,
I think the point about it being an active learning model is
the way that we want to, um, take this work forward so that,
um, it how you enable, uh, environment
and a culture across the public service that is that ask,
what we are asking people to do is ask the questions,
inquire and be considered about the problem
that you're trying to resolve or the opportunity,
or that you are trying to,
and that's why the partnership that we have with, um,
the policy project in DPMC and kawata for, uh, is important
because we are placing this within the context of policy.
This, like Dave said, this is, this is policy,
a policy process that's asking you to think
through some very specific dimensions in applying Titi.
So the learning model, uh, that idea
of the implementation is quite important for us.
Um, and we will,
and so part of the challenge is starting with ourselves
and creating the confidence to be able to do that
amongst ourselves and our own and being very diligent
and deliberate, um,
and disciplined actually in how we present, um,
both our second opinion advice,
but also our primary advice to government
and making sure, um,
that we are being exemplars of this work.
And then alongside that is mentioned working with agencies.
We, we, we we're going with the coalition
of the willing at the moment to see this as an opportunity.
Well, those are important engagements
because it could be well be that over the next 12 months,
there might be some refinements that are made as a result
of the engagements to the guidance.
So that's important. Um,
but we'll also look to,
they should see an improvement in
potentially feedback from ministers.
What, uh, might be that, um,
they can see an improvement in the advice that's coming, um,
through, because of the work that they're applying.
So that's, you know, that that's part of the plan.
But the other part is also we do, we do a significant amount
of second opinion advice
and what we want to lead, what we want to move to,
or what we are moving to is, for instance,
if we get advice from the min, uh, requests for, um,
support from the Ministry for Environment, for example,
over time, we would want to be able to say back to them,
these are the themes that we are seeing in terms
of the advice we are providing to you, and
therefore, um, if there's an opportunity
to be able to work with you.
So we are not having to give back to you the things
that ordinarily should be part
of your policy process anyway.
So it's how you kind of create a way of being able
to enable people to do the thinking themselves,
inquire into the thinking themselves without us necessarily
having to, you know, to do that all the time.
Um, so those are the, there will be
challenges, no doubt about it.
Um, but what we are trying to do is be quite reasonable,
reasonable and considered in, uh, moving forward
and applying this, in this, applying this work and,
and as I say, starting with ourselves
and with those who, who want to work with us on this mahi.
So you, you plan to have a, um, a dashboard of, of,
or what's the method for you measuring success
with this tool moving forward?
Yeah, um, we, we, we are planning to, uh, we've,
we've designed a set of criteria, um, that we are currently,
we've, we've kept in draft
because we want to test the criteria, what success,
what this would look like if we saw it in practice.
And our intention is, is that by using that criteria,
we would then be able to apply, um, uh, we, we would,
we would be able to pro provide a status report in, in terms
of, uh, a dashboard, um, for reporting.
There's two parts to it.
It is the, um, it is both the, uh, the application
of the ability to be able
to feel comfortable in applying the, the guidance.
Um, but secondly, it is then also, well, the guidance
actually leading to approved outcomes for, um, for people,
for the, uh, yeah,
for the reason in which the policy has been designed.
So that's probably a little bit longer, that is longer term.
Uh, 'cause you wanna be able to, uh, uh, apply the,
it's about applying the, the work in the context of the mahi
that the, that the agencies are engaged with.
So it's a a two-pronged approach in terms of the,
our monitoring, um, the monitoring that we would,
that we're intending to do.
The, um, Dave, you, you sort of, uh, articulated, uh,
the problem, this is endeavoring to solve itself,
um, in, in primarily around around policy
and delivery as Bernie talked to also.
Um, it's, I suppose my question is around like
how do you measure if it's a successful policy
or if it's not successful
and be, I I'm just mindful of the role
that this committee plays in, in, uh, improving performance,
holding mutual account, all the people, the above.
Mm-hmm. Uh, I'm trying to identify how you can assist us
with that so that we can do our money, uh, with regards
to our scrutinizing, et cetera itself.
Do you understand the question I'm trying to ask you?
I do. Um, the, the point,
I think it's, it's the opportunity.
The first point is some clarity for the committee.
Um, so when you are engaging with the community,
being clear about who you are engaging with
and for what purpose,
because at the moment, um, often that's not clear.
I don't know if it's always been clear in the select
committee, but certainly as public servants, that's not,
hasn't always been clear in some of the examples.
So it's providing that clarity.
And I, I think out of this also understanding
that not everything is just about,
um, Maori as constituents
or members of Hapu and iwi.
'cause sometimes we neglect to realize that this
responsibilities here as public servants
and for the government to serve citizens that are Maori.
Now, that has happened for many years.
That happened after World War ii,
where Maori soldiers came back
and didn't receive the same sort of attention
as other New Zealand citizens who bought in the war.
Yeah. So it's, it's just getting that,
um, that balance.
So we don't push everything to one side, one dimensional,
and we lift and we understand there's two components here.
And certainly from a a citizen perspective, if I look across
the public service
and the statistics, we are not serving Maori citizens Well,
that's just a fact.
So, so understanding, well, it's not all pushed into there.
We, we've really gotta highlight the Maori citizen component
as an example, and some clarity on when we are doing
that, why we are doing that.
Because you'd want to have some balance.
Mm-hmm. There, there would be a mix
of both quantitative
and qualitative ways that we could measure.
Um, the effectiveness of implementing Otto for us to
a real simple, uh, quantitative measure is what percentage
of our documents have recognized, um,
and, and clear descriptions of
how it's utilized in develop in the
development of that document.
It's very simple, simple way to be able to assess
that from a qualitative perspective.
Uh, it's being able to look at, um, as, as an example,
when we went out to do our engagement around the TE
Maori um, PRO proposals, um, what we, what we looked at is
actually who are the various, um, groupings of Maori
that, that we need to engage with
and not just taking it as gospel that actually I
and hapu are the only ones that we need to engage with them.
So developing really nuanced ways
and being able to express how that was, um, uh,
adopted using te.
Okay. Alright.
Are there any last questions
before I close this part of the session?
If not, I'll just close by saying I, I, I think this is, uh,
I think this is pretty exciting.
I think, uh, it's, uh, as Greg mentioned, uh,
and it's articulated in the documentation here,
this is kind long gestation to get to where we have, uh,
a lot of, uh, time and effort has been put into it.
And I think it's exciting that we've got to the point
where it is, where it's now starting to,
PTG gay health get the tangible, uh, part of this,
this happening itself.
So on behalf of the committee, thank you
to all those involved creation
and the big thinking behind this and, uh, and molding this.
I understand that this is a dynamic situation.
It's still evolving in that, and,
but I think you've got a solid model to start of,
uh, to go forward.
So I, I appreciate that
and thank you on behalf of, uh,
us here today with regards to that.
Um, and, uh, I will bring the briefing to a, uh, to a close.
We'll be seeing you, a number
of you again shortly type thing.
But thank you very much
for this session that we've had today.
Got it. Done.